# Machine Learning For Genomics

### Introduction
Genomic data generated by researchers has grown exponentially. This demands even better tools to derive insights from the data, including augmenting with other data for better inference and decision-making. Machine learning, Deep learning, and artificial intelligence have matured with powerful tools that can be applied in Genomics. However, in Africa, there is still a skills gap among Bioinformatics students in these technologies. Although the MSc Bioinformatics curricula contain the course, it is not being taught, putting the students at a disadvantage, as Bioinfromatuics leans more towards data science. In this course, we introduce the basics of machine learning, including practical skills in transforming genomic data for machine learning modeling. 

### Competencies
In this short course, we intend to impart knowledge and skills in the following competencies ([See ISCB Competencies](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005772)):
1. Knowledge and skills: Details of the scientific discovery process and the role of bioinformatics in it.
2. Knowledge, comprehension, and Application: Statistical, machine learning, and data science research methods in the context of molecular biology, genomics, medical or population genetics research
3. Knowledge and Application: Command line and scripting-based computing skills appropriate to the discipline.
4. Knowledge and skills: Data management

### Learning Objectives
To attain the above competencies, the workshop participants should be able to:
1. Describe the application of machine learning in genomics
2. Explain the various machine learning principles and how they can be applied to genomics
3. Explain the research design approaches as applied to machine learning for genomics
4. Know the various open science tools (Jupyter Notebooks, Pandas, Conda)and how they support a reproducible bioinformatics research
5. Know the various machine learning frameworks in Python


### Learning Outcomes
From the above objectives, the workshop participant should acquire the following skills;
1. Be able to set up Jupyter and Conda environments for a machine learning for a genomic project to ensure reproducibility
2. Be able to transform genomic data for machine learning modeling
3. Be able to perform exploratory analysis on genomic data, feature engineering, and parameter selection
4. Be able to develop and validate machine learning models using genomic data

### Instructors
1. Caleb Kibet
2. 

### Who should attend?

EANBiT Fellows

### Training Topics
- 



### Resources to use:

1. [Encoding DNA ](https://medium.com/mlearning-ai/apply-machine-learning-algorithms-for-genomics-data-classification-132972933723)
2. [Machine Learning in Bioinformatics: Genome Geography:](https://towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-in-bioinformatics-genome-geography-d1b1dbbfb4c2)From raw sequencing reads to a machine learning model, which infers an individuals geographical origin based on their genomic variation.
3. [Deep Learning for Genomics](https://colab.research.google.com/github/TankMermaid/1000-genomes-genetic-maps/blob/master/A_Primer_on_Deep_Learning_in_Genomics_Public.ipynb#scrollTo=bzsbNHqWiFek)
4. [Machine Learning for Genomics](https://towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-for-genomics-c02270a51795). How to transform your genomics data to fit into machine learning models. 
5. [Machine Learning For Good](https://github.com/DeltaAnalytics/machine_learning_for_good)

